# esm-244-final-project
Snowy Plover and Shorebird Abundance at Coal Point Oil Reserve  
ESM 244  
Anna Calle Angie Bouche

Coal Oil Point Reserve (COPR) was established in 1970 to protect part of the natural habitat along the South Coast of Santa Barbara County that a wide variety of bird species inhabit. It is one of the 35 reserves that form part of the University of California Natural Reserve System. This data exploration tool is intended for educators, birdwatchers, beach users, and everyone interested in the conservation efforts taking place at Coal Oil Point Reserve (COPR) in Santa Barbara, California. It provides interactive visualizations of data collected in two of COPR’s research programs: Snowy Plover Conservation and Bird Monitoring. 

The Snowy Plover Conservation program is the reserve’s best known research effort. It focuses on protecting the habitat of the Western Snowy Plover (Charadrius nivosus nivosus), a threatened shorebird species. In 2001, Snowy Plover nests were discovered on the reserve for the first time in decades, inspiring COPR to develop a targeted conservation program. As part of the program, staff collect Snowy Plover data at least three times per week during the breeding season. This data includes number of adults, number of nests, metrics to track reproduction, and fate of nests. Once a nest is identified, COPR’s observers will count the number or eggs, chicks hatched, and chicks fledged throughout the breeding season. Some nests are destroyed during the breeding season. When this is the case, COPR’s observers will identify the type of animal predator or environmental condition responsible.

COPR maintains a long-term monitoring program focused on measuring bird species abundance and diversity throughout the reserve. Since February 2015, bird surveys are conducted once a month within ten permanent sampling areas on the reserveknown as polygons. The surveys are conducted by two observers following COPR’s  bird monitoring protocol. Once a month, two of COPR’s observers will traverse the reserve on foot and spend a specific amount of time in each polygon confirming the present of all birds in that polygon visually or auditorily. For each bird observed its species, location, and behavior is recorded. 

